unrelenting itching. No longer will people be threatened by gross deformity from ﬁlariasis. Irrespective of personal views on the merits or achievability of malaria eradication, it is the conﬁdence in the availability of fast acting and highly effective ﬁrst, second or third generation ACTs that has contributed to the debate to ensure we are in a position where we do have the tools to attempt the audacious challenge of regional elimination. Eradication is, at present, an aspirational goal without powerful new tools and needs to be placed in the context of the deﬁnition of eradication – ‘global zero incidence of a speciﬁc organism’. Nevertheless, in the absence of the work of Youyou Tu and her team at Mission 523, it is probable that malaria would currently be a disease on the rise and one where treatment options were severely, life-threateningly limited. Millions of lives have been saved by the availability of ACTs and as cases fall [10] and we move away from the hideous statistic of more than 1 million lives, mainly children, lost per year to this treatable infection, we enter a future where a world without the disease can be contemplated with signiﬁcant economic beneﬁts for endemic countries [11].
Whatever the future, we are much better placed to treat malaria now than where we were before the availability of ACTs. In reﬂecting on this Nobel Prize, it is clear that many parallels can be drawn between the discovery, development, deployment and eventual impact of ivermectin and artemisinin. The malaria and helminth scientiﬁc and public health communities did not interface and, instead, developed independently. However, to achieve public health impact, common approaches were needed – public—private partnerships, global advocacy, NGDO involvement, subsidised pricing mechanisms or drug donations. Such processes deﬁne the complex path from scientiﬁc discovery, through to global health policy change, implementation, monitoring and evaluation to ensure the poorest communities beneﬁt from access to critical medicines. Whilst much remains to be done and many challenges remain, the Nobel Committee has made an enlightened decision – to recognize the science that has led to making the lives of millions of the poorest signiﬁcantly better than it was 50 years ago. In the next decades, with malaria and NTDs now embedded within the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, the drugs developed by Campbell, O¯ mura and Youyou Tu will be critical to achieve the targets for these diseases established by the international development community – some drugs, some legacy! Disclaimer Statement D.H.M. is supported by a grant from GlaxoSmithKline.
1Department of Parasitology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke Place, Liverpool L3 5QA, UK *Correspondence: David.Molyneux@lstmed.ac.uk (D.H. Molyneux).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pt.2015.10.008
