A Phase 3 Trial of RTS,S/AS01 Malaria Vaccine in African Infants A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
Abstract Background—The candidate malaria vaccine RTS,S/AS01 reduced episodes of both clinical and severe malaria in children 5 to 17 months of age by approximately 50% in an ongoing phase 3 trial. We studied infants 6 to 12 weeks of age recruited for the same trial.
METHODS—We administered RTS,S/AS01 or a comparator vaccine to 6537 infants who were 6 to 12 weeks of age at the time of the first vaccination in conjunction with Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) vaccines in a three-dose monthly schedule. Vaccine efficacy against the first or only episode of clinical malaria during the 12 months after vaccination, a coprimary end point, was analyzed with the use of Cox regression. Vaccine efficacy against all malaria episodes, vaccine efficacy against severe malaria, safety, and immunogenicity were also assessed.
RESULTS—The incidence of the first or only episode of clinical malaria in the intention-to-treat population during the 14 months after the first dose of vaccine was 0.31 per person-year in the RTS,S/AS01 group and 0.40 per person-year in the control group, for a vaccine efficacy of 30.1% (95% confidence interval [CI], 23.6 to 36.1). Vaccine efficacy in the per-protocol population was 31.3% (97.5% CI, 23.6 to 38.3). Vaccine efficacy against severe malaria was 26.0% (95% CI, −7.4 to 48.6) in the intention-to-treat population and 36.6% (95% CI, 4.6 to 57.7) in the per-protocol population. Serious adverse events occurred with a similar frequency in the two study groups. One month after administration of the third dose of RTS,S/AS01, 99.7% of children were positive for anti-circumsporozoite antibodies, with a geometric mean titer of 209 EU per milliliter (95% CI, 197 to 222).
CONCLUSIONS—The RTS,S/AS01 vaccine coadministered with EPI vaccines provided modest protection against both clinical and severe malaria in young infants. (Funded by Glaxo SmithKline Biologicals and the PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative; RTS,S ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00866619.) Considerable gains have been achieved in malaria control during the past decade.1,2 Nonetheless, malaria remains a major public health concern. In 2010, an estimated 216 million cases of malaria and 655,000 malaria-related deaths occurred, with the vast majority of deaths occurring in African children.1 The RTS,S/AS01 candidate malaria vaccine targets the pre-erythrocytic stage of the Plasmodium falciparum parasite. It was developed to reduce clinical and severe malaria Address reprint requests to Ms. Sara Mian-McCarthy at PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Communications and Advocacy Unit, 455 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Suite 1000, Washington, DC 20001-2621, or at smian-mccarthy@path.org.
Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
The authors are listed in the Appendix. All the authors assume responsibility for the overall content and integrity of the article.
HHS Public Access Author manuscript N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.
Published in final edited form as: N Engl J Med. 2012 December 13; 367(24): 2284–2295. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1208394.

in African children. Ideally, it would be administered through the well-established Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI).
In 2011, we reported the results for the first coprimary end point from an ongoing phase 3 trial, which showed that during 12 months of follow-up, RTS,S/AS01 had an efficacy against clinical and severe malaria of 55.8% (97.5% confidence interval [CI], 50.6 to 60.4) and 47.3% (95% CI, 22.4 to 64.2), respectively, among children 5 to 17 months of age at enrollment (per-protocol analysis).3 Vaccine efficacy against severe malaria among children 6 to 12 weeks of age and those 5 to 17 months of age combined was 34.8% (95% CI, 16.2 to 49.2) during an average of 11 months of follow-up (range, 0 to 22). We now report on the second coprimary end point from the same trial: efficacy against clinical malaria during 12 months of follow-up among infants 6 to 12 weeks of age at enrollment, when RTS,S/AS01 was coadministered with EPI vaccines.
METHODS STUDY DESIGN Details of the study methods have been described previously3–7 and are provided in the Supplementary Appendix and the study protocol, both of which are available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. This phase 3, randomized, controlled, double-blind trial is being conducted at 11 centers in 7 African countries with a range of malaria-transmission intensity (Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Appendix). The trial is designed to evaluate vaccine efficacy, safety, and immunogenicity for 32 months after the first dose of study vaccine in children 6 to 12 weeks of age or 5 to 17 months of age at enrollment. The trial includes three study groups in each age category: infants who received three doses of RTS,S/AS01 administered at 1-month intervals and a booster dose 18 months after the third dose, infants who received three doses of RTS,S/AS01 at 1-month intervals without a booster dose, and a control group of infants who received a non-malaria comparator vaccine. The analysis described in this report combines the first two groups (referred to as the RTS,S/AS01 group) and compares this group with the control group6 14 months after the first dose of vaccine administered in children 6 to 12 weeks of age (Fig. S2 in the Supplementary Appendix). The trial protocol was approved by all relevant ethics review boards and national regulatory authorities (Tables S1A and S1B in the Supplementary Appendix). Written informed consent was obtained from the children’s parents or guardians. The study was undertaken in accordance with Good Clinical Practice guidelines.8 STUDY OVERSIGHT The trial was sponsored by GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals (GSK), the vaccine developer and manufacturer, and funded by both GSK and the Program for Appropriate Technology in Health (PATH) Malaria Vaccine Initiative, which received a grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. All study centers received study grants from the Malaria Vaccine Initiative, which also provided funding for authors’ travel and accommodations related to this trial. All the authors reviewed all manuscript drafts, approved the final version of the manuscript, and made the decision to submit it for publication. No GSK authors were involved in the collection or analysis of the data; the analysis was performed by et al.
Page 2 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

an independent statistician. The authors had full access to the results. The authors remain unaware of study-group assignments in this ongoing trial and do not have access to the raw data at this point. Details of the contributions of all the authors to the study are available in the Supplementary Appendix. The Clinical Trials Partnership Committee and Writing Group vouch for the completeness and accuracy of the data presented and for the fidelity of this report to the study protocol.
RANDOMIZATION AND VACCINATION From December 2009 through January 2011, a total of 6537 infants 6 to 12 weeks of age were randomly assigned to one of the three study groups in a 1:1:1 ratio. Three doses of the RTS,S/AS01 or the comparator vaccine, meningococcal serogroup C conjugate vaccine (Menjugate, Novartis), were coadministered with EPI vaccines according to the World Health Organization EPI schedule.9 EPI vaccines comprised a diphtheria–tetanus–whole-cell pertussis–hepatitis B–Hemophilus influenzae type b pentavalent vaccine (Tritanrix HepB Hib, GSK) and an oral poliovirus vaccine containing serotypes 1, 2, and 3 (Polio Sabin, GSK). The study and pentavalent vaccines were administered intramuscularly at different protocol-specified injection sites.
SURVEILLANCE FOR CLINICAL AND SEVERE MALARIA Passive surveillance for malaria began at the time of the first vaccination. Parents or guardians of the study participants were encouraged to seek care at a health facility if the child had any signs of illness, and transportation was facilitated. All participants who presented to a study facility with reported or documented fever during the previous 24 hours were evaluated for malaria.
The primary efficacy end point for this analysis was the incidence of clinical malaria, defined as an illness in a child who was brought to a study facility with an axillary temperature of 37.5°C or higher and P. falciparum asexual para sitemia at a density of more than 5000 parasites per cubic millimeter or a case of malaria meeting the primary case definition of severe malaria (Table S2 in the Supplementary Appendix). Different parasite thresholds were used for secondary case definitions (Table 1). Participants who were hospitalized were evaluated for severe malaria on the basis of a protocol-defined algorithm (Table S3 in the Supplementary Appendix).4,10 SAFETY SURVEILLANCE Data regarding serious adverse events were recorded by means of passive surveillance beginning after the first dose of vaccine. Verbal autopsies were conducted for deaths that occurred outside study facilities.11 Information was collected on all unsolicited reports of adverse events that occurred within 30 days after vaccination and on reactogenicity (pain, swelling, redness at the injection site, drowsiness, fever, irritability or fussiness, or loss of appetite) within 7 days after vaccination among the first 200 participants enrolled at each center. Symptom intensity was assessed with the use of standardized methods (Table S4 in the Supplementary Appendix). Information on related adverse events within 30 days after vaccination was collected for all participants. Study clinicians used clinical judgment to decide whether an adverse event was likely to be related to the vaccine. In an analysis et al.
Page 3 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

of previous RTS,S studies, rash was observed more frequently in children vaccinated with RTS,S than in controls.12 Rashes and mucocutaneous diseases occurring within 30 days after vaccination and seizures occurring within 7 days after vaccination were reported according to Brighton Collaboration guidelines13,14 (see the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix).
IMMUNOGENICITY Anti-circumsporozoite antibodies were measured by means of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay15 in the first 200 infants enrolled at each study center at screening and 1 month after dose-3. An antibody titer of 0.5 EU per millimeter or greater was considered to be positive.
LABORATORY AND RADIOLOGIC PROCEDURES Laboratory and radiologic procedures have been reported previously5 and are described in the Supplementary Appendix.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS The statistical methods have been described in detail previously.3,7 We used Cox regression models (1 minus hazard ratio) to evaluate vaccine efficacy against the first or only episode of clinical malaria, using the study center as a stratification factor that allowed for differential baseline hazards. For the coprimary end point, vaccine efficacy against clinical malaria during 12 months of follow-up in the two age categories, 97.5% confidence intervals were used, ensuring an overall two-sided alpha level of 5%. The proportionality of hazards was evaluated by means of Schoenfeld residuals and models, including time-varying covariates.
Secondary analyses, which included evaluations based on other case definitions and an analysis including multiple episodes of clinical malaria, were performed with the use of negative binomial regression. Vaccine efficacy against severe malaria was defined as 1 minus the risk ratio and is presented with 95% confidence intervals and Fisher’s exact P values.
Primary analyses of vaccine efficacy were based on the per-protocol population, which included all participants who received three doses of a study vaccine coadministered with EPI vaccines and who were included in efficacy surveillance, starting 14 days after the third dose of a study vaccine. The modified intention-to-treat population included all participants who received at least one dose of a study vaccine. In the adjusted analyses, vaccine efficacy was adjusted for study center and distance to the nearest outpatient facility (≤5 km vs.
>5 km). Data were censored 14 months after the first dose of vaccine, or at the date of emigration, withdrawal of consent, or death.
Serious adverse events were coded from clinician-assigned diagnoses according to the preferred terms of the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities16 and were based on available clinical and laboratory evidence.
The primary analysis of immunogenicity was based on the per-protocol population. Anticircumsporozoite antibody titers were plotted and evaluated after the third dose of a study vaccine on the basis of seropositivity levels and geometric mean titers.
et al.
Page 4 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

RESULTS STUDY POPULATION In total, 6537 infants 6 to 12 weeks of age were enrolled; 6003 (91.8%) were included in the per-protocol analysis (Fig. 1, and Fig. S3 in the Supplementary Appendix). Baseline demographic characteristics were similar in the two study groups (Table S5 in the Supplementary Appendix). The numbers of participants and malaria episodes according to study center are shown in Table S6 in the Supplementary Appendix. As expected, the majority of malaria episodes were reported by centers in areas with the highest transmission; 43.5% of all clinical malaria episodes were reported by two high-transmission sites in western Kenya. These two sites, combined with the site in Nanoro, Burkina Faso (where transmission is high but seasonal), accounted for 72.6% of clinical malaria episodes in this analysis. The rate of use of insecticide-treated nets was 85.8% overall and was similar in the two study groups. Indoor residual spraying was conducted as a public health intervention at four study centers; at those centers, spraying coverage was low (Table S7 in the Supplementary Appendix).
VACCINE EFFICACY AGAINST CLINICAL AND SEVERE MALARIA In the per-protocol population, the incidence of a first or only episode of clinical malaria meeting the primary case definition during 12 months of follow-up was 0.37 per person-year in the RTS,S/AS01 group and 0.48 per person-year in the control group, for a vaccine efficacy of 31.3% (97.5% CI, 23.6 to 38.3). Kaplan–Meier curves are shown in Figures 2A and 2B. Vaccine efficacy was not constant over time (P<0.001 by Schoenfeld residuals), with efficacy higher at the beginning than at the end of the follow-up period (Table S8 in the Supplementary Appendix). Vaccine efficacy against all clinical malaria episodes was 32.9% (95% CI, 26.3 to 38.8). Estimates of efficacy against clinical malaria were consistent across all case definitions and in both adjusted and intention-to-treat analyses (Table 1).
At least one episode of severe malaria occurred in 58 of 3995 infants (1.5%) in the RTS,S/ AS01 group and in 46 of 2008 infants (2.3%) in the control group, for a vaccine efficacy of 36.6% (95% CI, 4.6 to 57.7) in the per-protocol population. In the intention-to-treat population, at least one episode of severe malaria occurred in 77 of 4358 infants (1.8%) in the RTS,S/AS01 group and in 52 of 2179 infants (2.4%) in the control group, for a vaccine efficacy of 26.0% (95% CI, −7.4 to 48.6) (Table 1, and Tables S15 and S16 in the Supplementary Appendix).
SAFETY SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS—Serious adverse events were reported in 17.9% (95% CI, 16.8 to 19.1) of recipients of the RTS,S/AS01 vaccine and in 19.2% (95% CI, 17.6 to 20.9) of recipients of the meningococcal vaccine (Table 2, and Table S9 in the Supplementary Appendix). A total of 94 infants died: 66 of 4358 infants (1.5%; 95% CI, 1.2 to 1.9) in the RTS,S/AS01 group and 28 of 2179 infants (1.3%; 95% CI, 0.9 to 1.9) in the control group. Causes of death were similar in the two groups; none of the deaths were thought to be related to vaccination (Table S10 in the Supplementary Appendix). Serious adverse events that were considered to be related to a study vaccine occurred in 7 infants: 4 et al.
Page 5 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

of the 4358 infants in the RTS,S/AS01 group and 3 of the 2179 infants in the control group; 4 events (2 in each group) were episodes of fever for which infants were hospitalized for investigation. One infant (in the control group) had anaphylaxis, one infant (in the RTS,S/ AS01 group) had a suspected injection-site infection related to the pentavalent vaccine, and one infant (in the RTS,S/AS01 group) had repeated febrile seizures associated with a respiratory infection. The frequency of seizures within 7 days after vaccination, reported previously, was similar in the two study groups.3 Meningitis of any cause was reported as a serious adverse event in 11 infants: 9 of the 4358 infants in the RTS,S/AS01 group and 2 of the 2179 infants in the control group (relative risk in the RTS,S/AS01 group, 2.3; 95% CI, 0.5 to 10.4). A pathogen was identified for 7 of the events (salmonella in 3 episodes of meningitis and pneumococcus in 4 episodes). The 4 remaining events, with no pathogen identified, were reported by a single study center (3 episodes of meningitis in the RTS,S/AS01 group and 1 episode in the control group). Of the 11 episodes of meningitis, 2 were new (1 due to pneumococcus and 1 due to salmonella); the 9 other episodes have been reported previously.3 Investigator-driven medical review of previously reported meningitis episodes led to reclassification of 1 episode as an episode of pneumonia and reclassification of 4 episodes without cause as 2 episodes of pneumococcal meningitis and 2 of salmonella meningitis. Four of the episodes of meningitis occurred within 30 days after vaccination.
ADVERSE EVENTS—Unsolicited reports of adverse events within 30 days after vaccination were recorded with similar frequency in the RTS,S/AS01 group (79.4%; 95% CI, 77.2 to 81.5) and in the control group (81.3%; 95% CI, 78.3 to 84.1). No clinically important imbalances were observed (Table S11A in the Supplementary Appendix).
Information on unsolicited reports of adverse events related to the vaccine or leading to withdrawal within 30 days after vaccination is shown in Table S11B in the Supplementary Appendix. The frequency of solicited reports of local symptoms was similar among infants who received the RTS,S/AS01 vaccine and among those who received the meningococcal vaccine and was lower than that observed with the pentavalent vaccine (Table S13 in the Supplementary Appendix). Systemic reactogenicity was higher in the RTS,S/AS01 group than in the control group (Fig. 3, and Table S12 in the Supplementary Appendix).
Postvaccination fever was reported after 30.6% of doses (95% CI, 29.2 to 32.0) in the RTS,S/AS01 group and after 21.1% of doses (95% CI, 19.4 to 22.8) in the control group.
A temperature higher than 39°C was reported after less than 1% of doses. The incidence of mucocutaneous disease was similar in the two study groups (Table S14 in the Supplementary Appendix).
IMMUNOGENICITY Before vaccination, 34.3% and 35.2% of infants in the RTS,S/AS01 and control groups, respectively, were positive for anti-circumsporozoite antibodies but at low titers (Fig. S4 in the Supplementary Appendix). One month after the third dose of the study vaccine, 99.7% of infants in the RTS,S/AS01 group were positive for anti-circumsporozoite antibodies, with a geometric mean titer of 209 EU per milliliter (95% CI, 197 to 222).
et al.
Page 6 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

DISCUSSION This phase 3 trial showed that in young infants, the RTS,S/AS01 candidate vaccine provided modest protection against malaria when coadministered with EPI vaccines. The efficacy of RTS,S/AS01 reported here is lower than that observed in a phase 2 trial involving infants at three of the phase 3 trial sites, in which RTS,S/AS01 was coadministered with EPI vaccines.
In that trial, geometric mean titers of anti-circumsporozoite antibodies after vaccination were similar to those measured here, but vaccine efficacy against clinical malaria was 61.6% (95% CI, 35.6 to 77.1).17 Although we wish to avoid overinterpretation of the results of this previously reported small phase 2 trial with wide confidence intervals, it is notable that this higher estimate of efficacy comes from a study conducted at sites in areas with low-to-moderate malaria transmission. It is possible that the pooled estimate across the 11 centers in the phase 3 trial obscures differences in vaccine efficacy according to transmission intensity and that these two sets of results are compatible with each other.
The efficacy of the RTS,S/AS01 vaccine reported here is also lower than that reported previously among older children recruited for this trial at the same study centers.3 A likely explanation for the lower vaccine efficacy among infants is an age-dependent differential immune response to the vaccine. This concept is supported by the lower anti-circumsporozoite antibody titers observed in infants (geometric mean titer, 209 EU per milliliter; 95% CI, 197 to 222) as compared with titers in older children (621 EU per milliliter; 95% CI, 592 to 652), reported previously.3 Although the titer of anticircumsporozoite antibodies is not an established correlate of the level of protection, an association with efficacy has been observed in several trials.17–21 Infants may have mounted a lower immune response than older children owing to coadministration of RTS,S/AS01 with routine EPI vaccines, an inhibitory effect of maternally derived anti-circumsporozoite antibodies, an absence of priming with hepatitis B vaccine or with P. falciparum infection, or the infant’s immature immune system.
Coadministration of RTS,S/AS01 with the pentavalent vaccine and the oral poliovirus vaccine might have resulted in immune interference and contributed to the lower anticircumsporozoite antibody titers in the younger infants. Two phase 2 studies have explored the immunologic response to the related RTS,S/AS02 vaccine, either when co administered with a diphtheria–tetanus–pertussis–hepatitis B vaccine or when given 2 weeks afterward.
The geometric mean titer of anti-circumsporozoite antibodies was lower when vaccines were coadministered than when they were staggered (70 EU per milliliter [95% CI, 54 to 90] vs. 200 EU per milliliter [95% CI, 151 to 265]).20,21 However, vaccine efficacy against infection was similar in the two trials (65.2% [95% CI, 20.7 to 84.7] during 6 months after vaccination and 65.9% [95% CI, 42.6 to 79.8] during 3 months after vaccination, respectively).
An absence of priming with hepatitis B vaccine or with P. falciparum infection may also have contributed to the lower anti-circumsporozoite antibody titers. In this trial, infants simultaneously received a hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)–containing combination vaccine and the RTS,S vaccine, which contains HBsAg fused as a carrier protein to the circumsporozoite protein. Immune interference on concurrent administration of similar et al.
Page 7 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

protein components has been described.22 In contrast, in older children vaccinated against hepatitis B, memory T-cell reactivation may have enhanced the anti-circumsporozoite antibody response to RTS,S/AS01.22 One study showed a tendency toward higher anticircumsporozoite antibody responses in children who had been vaccinated against hepatitis B than in children who had not previously received hepatitis B vaccine.23 Maternally derived antibodies can interfere with the immune response in young infants; such interference is common with live vaccines, such as the measles vaccine, but can also occur with some protein vaccines.24,25 Similarly, passively acquired antibodies to either HBsAg or the circumsporozoite components of the RTS,S/AS01 vaccine might have suppressed immune responses. Finally, although most protein vaccines and polysaccharide–protein conjugate vaccines are immunogenic in young infants, improved immunogenicity and efficacy have often been achieved when vaccination has extended beyond the first few months of life.22,26,27 As previously reported in older children,3 statistical models indicated nonproportionality of hazards over time. This could be due to waning vaccine efficacy, differential acquisition of natural immunity, or other factors that may influence the model,28 such as heterogeneity of exposure, the vaccine effect at the individual level, or both.29,30 If vaccine efficacy does wane, this might contribute to the lower observed efficacy among infants than among older children, especially because young infants may be less susceptible to malaria in the immediate postvaccination period owing to maternally acquired immunity, fetal hemoglobin, lower exposure, and other factors.31 The 11 sites of the phase 3 trial cover a wide range of malaria-transmission intensity.
The inclusion of sites in high-transmission or seasonal-transmission areas and the large proportion of cases of severe and clinical malaria from these sites might have contributed to the lower vaccine efficacy among infants in this trial than in earlier trials involving infants.
The implications of the large representation of malaria episodes from high-transmission areas may become apparent when site-specific data are analyzed at a later date, as specified by the protocol. Estimates of site-specific vaccine efficacy and the corresponding estimates of clinical or severe malaria episodes averted will help to determine what role this vaccine might have in malaria control. Exploration of factors that might affect vaccine efficacy, including the effect of maternal antibodies, the role of immune interference by EPI vaccines, the effect of the RTS,S/AS01 booster, and status with respect to previous exposure to P.
falciparum parasites, will provide crucial information for the further development of this vaccine and for other malaria vaccines under development.32 Overall, fatal, or vaccine-related serious adverse events were balanced between the study groups. In the previous analysis, which included infants and older children, the incidence of meningitis was imbalanced between the RTS,S/AS01 and control groups.3 The imbalance remains, but we now have clarified that the majority of cases had a bacterial cause. We will continue to monitor the incidence of meningitis throughout the trial. The imbalance in the incidence of rash, observed in previous RTS,S studies,12,33 was not confirmed in this larger trial.
et al.
Page 8 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

This phase 3 trial shows efficacy of the RTS,S/AS01 vaccine. Data from the remainder of this trial and additional studies in progress will contribute to the understanding of the complex interplay among the intensity of exposure to malaria, the immune response, and vaccine efficacy.
Supplementary Material Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Authors The RTS,S Clinical Trials Partnership, Selidji Todagbe Agnandji, M.D., M.P.H., Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany: Bertrand Lell, M.D., Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany: José Francisco Fernandes, M.D., Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany: Béatrice Peggy Abossolo, M.D., Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany: Barbara Gaelle Nfono Ondo Methogo, M.D., Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany: Anita Lumeka Kabwende, M.D., Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany: Ayola Akim Adegnika, M.D., Ph.D., Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany: Benjamin Mordmüller, M.D., Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany: Saadou Issifou, M.D., Ph.D., Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany: Peter Gottfried Kremsner, M.D., Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany: et al.
Page 9 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

Jahit Sacarlal, M.D., M.P.H., Ph.D., Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique, and Barcelona Center for International Health Research (CRESIB)–Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona Pedro Aide, M.D., Ph.D., Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique, and Barcelona Center for International Health Research (CRESIB)–Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona Miguel Lanaspa, M.D., Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique, and Barcelona Center for International Health Research (CRESIB)–Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona John J. Aponte, M.D., Ph.D., Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique, and Barcelona Center for International Health Research (CRESIB)–Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona Sonia Machevo, M.D., Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique, and Barcelona Center for International Health Research (CRESIB)–Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona Sozinho Acacio, M.D., Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique, and Barcelona Center for International Health Research (CRESIB)–Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona Helder Bulo, D.V.M., Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique, and Barcelona Center for International Health Research (CRESIB)–Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona Betuel Sigauque, M.D., Ph.D., Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique, and Barcelona Center for International Health Research (CRESIB)–Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona Eusébio Macete, M.D., M.P.H., Ph.D., Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique, and Barcelona Center for International Health Research (CRESIB)–Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona Pedro Alonso, M.D., Ph.D., Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique, and Barcelona Center for International Health Research (CRESIB)–Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona Salim Abdulla, M.D., Ph.D., et al.
Page 10 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland Nahya Salim, M.D., Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland Rose Minja, C.O., Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland Maxmillian Mpina, M.Sc., Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland Saumu Ahmed, M.D., Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland Ali Mohammed Ali, M.Sc., Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland Ali Takadir Mtoro, M.D., Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland Ali Said Hamad, M.D., Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland Paul Mutani, M.D, Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland Marcel Tanner, Ph.D., Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland Halidou Tinto, Pharm.D., Ph.D., Institut de Recherche en Science de la Santé, Nanoro, Burkina Faso, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium Umberto D’Alessandro, M.D., Ph.D., Institut de Recherche en Science de la Santé, Nanoro, Burkina Faso, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium Hermann Sorgho, Ph.D., Institut de Recherche en Science de la Santé, Nanoro, Burkina Faso, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium Innocent Valea, Pharm.D., et al.
Page 11 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

Institut de Recherche en Science de la Santé, Nanoro, Burkina Faso, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium Biébo Bihoun, M.D., Institut de Recherche en Science de la Santé, Nanoro, Burkina Faso, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium Issa Guiraud, M.D., Institut de Recherche en Science de la Santé, Nanoro, Burkina Faso, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium Berenger Kaboré, M.D., Institut de Recherche en Science de la Santé, Nanoro, Burkina Faso, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium Olivier Sombié, M.D., Institut de Recherche en Science de la Santé, Nanoro, Burkina Faso, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium Robert Tinga Guiguemdé, M.D., Ph.D., Institut de Recherche en Science de la Santé, Nanoro, Burkina Faso, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium Jean Bosco Ouédraogo, M.D., Ph.D., Institut de Recherche en Science de la Santé, Nanoro, Burkina Faso, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium Mary J. Hamel, M.D., D.T.M.&H., KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya Simon Kariuki, Ph.D., KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya Martina Oneko, M.D., KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya Chris Odero, Dip.Clin.Med., H.N.D.P.H., KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya Kephas Otieno, H.N.D.M.L.T., KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya Norbert Awino, B.Ed, P.Dip.P.M., KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya Meredith McMorrow, M.D., M.P.H., KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya Vincent Muturi-Kioi, M.B., Ch.B., KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya Kayla F. Laserson, Sc.D., KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya et al.
Page 12 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

Laurence Slutsker, M.D., M.P.H., KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya Walter Otieno, M.D., M.Med., Ph.D., KEMRI–Walter Reed Project, Kombewa, Kenya Lucas Otieno, M.D., M.P.H., KEMRI–Walter Reed Project, Kombewa, Kenya Nekoye Otsyula, M.B., Ch.B., KEMRI–Walter Reed Project, Kombewa, Kenya Stacey Gondi, M.C.H.D., KEMRI–Walter Reed Project, Kombewa, Kenya Allan Otieno, M.B., Ch.B., M.Med., KEMRI–Walter Reed Project, Kombewa, Kenya Victorine Owira, B.A., KEMRI–Walter Reed Project, Kombewa, Kenya Esther Oguk, Dip.Clin.Med., KEMRI–Walter Reed Project, Kombewa, Kenya George Odongo, B.Sc., KEMRI–Walter Reed Project, Kombewa, Kenya Jon Ben Woods, M.D., KEMRI–Walter Reed Project, Kombewa, Kenya Bernhards Ogutu, M.D., Ph.D., KEMRI–Walter Reed Project, Kombewa, Kenya Patricia Njuguna, M.B., Ch.B., KEMRI–Wellcome Trust Research Program, Kilifi, Kenya Roma Chilengi, M.D., M.P.H., KEMRI–Wellcome Trust Research Program, Kilifi, Kenya Pauline Akoo, M.B., Ch.B., KEMRI–Wellcome Trust Research Program, Kilifi, Kenya Christine Kerubo, M.B., Ch.B., KEMRI–Wellcome Trust Research Program, Kilifi, Kenya Charity Maingi, R.N., M.P.H., KEMRI–Wellcome Trust Research Program, Kilifi, Kenya Trudie Lang, Ph.D., KEMRI–Wellcome Trust Research Program, Kilifi, Kenya Ally Olotu, M.B., Ch.B., KEMRI–Wellcome Trust Research Program, Kilifi, Kenya Philip Bejon, M.B., B.S., D.T.M.&H., Ph.D., et al.
Page 13 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

KEMRI–Wellcome Trust Research Program, Kilifi, Kenya Kevin Marsh, M.D., M.R.C.P., D.T.M.&H., KEMRI–Wellcome Trust Research Program, Kilifi, Kenya Kintampo Health Research Center, KEMRI–Wellcome Trust Research Program, Kilifi, Kenya Seth Owusu-Agyei, Ph.D., Kintampo, Ghana, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Kwaku Poku Asante, M.D., M.P.H., Kintampo, Ghana, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Kingsley Osei-Kwakye, M.D., M.P.H., Kintampo, Ghana, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Owusu Boahen, M.P.H., Kintampo, Ghana, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London David Dosoo, M.Sc., Kintampo, Ghana, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Isaac Asante, M.B.A., Kintampo, Ghana, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London George Adjei, M.Sc., Kintampo, Ghana, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Evans Kwara, M.D., Kintampo, Ghana, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Daniel Chandramohan, M.D., Ph.D., Kintampo, Ghana, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Brian Greenwood, M.D., Kintampo, Ghana, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London John Lusingu, M.D., Ph.D., National Institute for Medical Research, Korogwe, Tanzania, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Samwel Gesase, M.D., National Institute for Medical Research, Korogwe, Tanzania, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Anangisye Malabeja, M.D., National Institute for Medical Research, Korogwe, Tanzania, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Omari Abdul, M.D., et al.
Page 14 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

National Institute for Medical Research, Korogwe, Tanzania, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Coline Mahende, M.Sc., National Institute for Medical Research, Korogwe, Tanzania, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Edwin Liheluka, M.P.H., National Institute for Medical Research, Korogwe, Tanzania, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Lincoln Malle, Dip.M.L.T., National Institute for Medical Research, Korogwe, Tanzania, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Martha Lemnge, Ph.D., National Institute for Medical Research, Korogwe, Tanzania, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Thor G. Theander, M.D., D.Sc., National Institute for Medical Research, Korogwe, Tanzania, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Chris Drakeley, Ph.D., National Institute for Medical Research, Korogwe, Tanzania, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London Daniel Ansong, M.B., F.W.A.C.P., Ch.B., School of Medical Sciences, Kumasi, Ghana Tsiri Agbenyega, M.B., Ch.B., Ph.D., School of Medical Sciences, Kumasi, Ghana Samuel Adjei, M.B., Ch.B., P.G.Dip., School of Medical Sciences, Kumasi, Ghana Harry Owusu Boateng, M.B., Ch.B., M.P.H., M.W.A.C.P., School of Medical Sciences, Kumasi, Ghana Theresa Rettig, M.D., School of Medical Sciences, Kumasi, Ghana John Bawa, M.B.A., School of Medical Sciences, Kumasi, Ghana et al.
Page 15 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

Justice Sylverken, M.B., Ch.B. Grad.Dip., M.W.A.C.P., School of Medical Sciences, Kumasi, Ghana David Sambian, Dip.Lab.Tech., School of Medical Sciences, Kumasi, Ghana Anima Sarfo, M.B., Ch.B., School of Medical Sciences, Kumasi, Ghana Alex Agyekum, M.Phil., School of Medical Sciences, Kumasi, Ghana Francis Martinson, M.B., Ch.B., M.P.H., Ph.D., University of North Carolina Project, Lilongwe, Malawi Irving Hoffman, M.P.H., University of North Carolina Project, Lilongwe, Malawi Tisungane Mvalo, M.B., B.S., University of North Carolina Project, Lilongwe, Malawi Portia Kamthunzi, M.B., B.S. M.Trop.Paed. D.T.C.H., University of North Carolina Project, Lilongwe, Malawi Rutendo Nkomo, M.B., Ch.B., University of North Carolina Project, Lilongwe, Malawi Tapiwa Tembo, M.Sc., University of North Carolina Project, Lilongwe, Malawi Gerald Tegha, Dip.Lab.Tech., M.Sc., University of North Carolina Project, Lilongwe, Malawi Mercy Tsidya, Dip.Edu., University of North Carolina Project, Lilongwe, Malawi Jane Kilembe, B.Sc., University of North Carolina Project, Lilongwe, Malawi Chimwemwe Chawinga, Dip.Clin.Med., University of North Carolina Project, Lilongwe, Malawi W. Ripley Ballou, M.D., GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium (in alphabetical order) Joe Cohen, Ph.D., GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium (in alphabetical order) Yolanda Guerra, M.D., GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium (in alphabetical order) Erik Jongert, Ph.D., GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium (in alphabetical order) Didier Lapierre, M.D., et al.
Page 16 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium (in alphabetical order) Amanda Leach, M.R.C.P.C.H., GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium (in alphabetical order) Marc Lievens, M.Sc., GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium (in alphabetical order) Opokua Ofori-Anyinam, Ph.D., GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium (in alphabetical order) Aurélie Olivier, Ph.D., GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium (in alphabetical order) Johan Vekemans, M.D., Ph.D., GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium (in alphabetical order) Terrell Carter, M.H.S., PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Washington, DC (in alphabetical order) David Kaslow, M.D., PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Washington, DC (in alphabetical order) Didier Leboulleux, M.D., PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Washington, DC (in alphabetical order) Christian Loucq, M.D., PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Washington, DC (in alphabetical order) Afiya Radford, B.S., PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Washington, DC (in alphabetical order) Barbara Savarese, R.N., PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Washington, DC (in alphabetical order) David Schellenberg, M.D., PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Washington, DC (in alphabetical order) Marla Sillman, M.S., PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Washington, DC (in alphabetical order) Preeti Vansadia, M.H.S.
PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Washington, DC (in alphabetical order) Affiliations Acknowledgments Supported by GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals (GSK) and the PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, which received a grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
Drs. Aide, Greenwood, and Woods report receiving grant support from GlaxoSmithKline through their institutions.
Drs. Aponte and Sacarlal report receiving consulting fees from GlaxoSmithKline through their institutions. Drs.
Jongert and Olivier report being employees of GlaxoSmithKline, and Drs. Ballou, Guerra, Lapierre, Leach, OforiAnyinam, and Vekemans and Mr. Lievens report being employees of and holding stock in GlaxoSmithKline. Dr.
Rettig reports receiving travel support from the PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, and Mr. Bawa reports receiving et al.
Page 17 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

travel support from the PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative through his institution. Drs. Bejon, Mwambingu, and Olotu report receiving grant support from the PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative through their institutions. Dr.
Cohen reports receiving consulting fees from and holding stock in GlaxoSmithKline, being a former employee of GlaxoSmithKline, and being a named inventor on several patents and patent applications related to malariavaccine development, the rights to which have been assigned to GlaxoSmithKline. Dr. D’Alessandro reports receiving consulting fees and lecture fees from Sigma-Tau Pharmaceuticals through his institution and lecture fees from Novartis through his institution. Dr. Kaslow reports holding stock and stock options in Merck. Dr.
Loucq reports holding stock in GlaxoSmithKline. Dr. Lusingu reports receiving grant support, payment for the development of education presentations, and travel support from the PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative through his institution and grant support from GlaxoSmithKline through his institution. Dr. Marsh reports receiving travel support and payment for board membership from Novartis. Dr. Njuguna reports receiving consulting fees from GlaxoSmithKline and grant support from the PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative through her institution. Dr.
Schellenberg reports receiving consulting fees from the PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative. Dr. Tanner reports receiving payment for board membership from the UBS Optimus Foundation, payment for board membership from Novartis through his institution, grant support and travel support from the PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative through his institution, and travel support from Sanaria through his institution. No other potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
Appendix The authors are as follows: Albert Schweitzer Hospital, Lambaréné, Gabon, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany: Selidji Todagbe Agnandji, M.D., M.P.H., Bertrand Lell, M.D., José Francisco Fernandes, M.D., Béatrice Peggy Abossolo, M.D., Barbara Gaelle Nfono Ondo Methogo, M.D., Anita Lumeka Kabwende, M.D., Ayola Akim Adegnika, M.D., Ph.D., Benjamin Mordmüller, M.D., Saadou Issifou, M.D., Ph.D., Peter Gottfried Kremsner, M.D.; Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça, Manhiça, Mozambique, and Barcelona Center for International Health Research (CRESIB)–Universitat de Barcelona, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona: Jahit Sacarlal, M.D., M.P.H., Ph.D., Pedro Aide, M.D., Ph.D., Miguel Lanaspa, M.D., John J. Aponte, M.D., Ph.D., Sonia Machevo, M.D., Sozinho Acacio, M.D., Helder Bulo, D.V.M., Betuel Sigauque, M.D., Ph.D., Eusébio Macete, M.D., M.P.H., Ph.D., Pedro Alonso, M.D., Ph.D.; Ifakara Health Institute, Bagamoyo, Tanzania, and Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland: Salim Abdulla, M.D., Ph.D., Nahya Salim, M.D., Rose Minja, C.O., Maxmillian Mpina, M.Sc., Saumu Ahmed, M.D., Ali Mohammed Ali, M.Sc., Ali Takadir Mtoro, M.D., Ali Said Hamad, M.D., Paul Mutani, M.D, Marcel Tanner, Ph.D.; Institut de Recherche en Science de la Santé, Nanoro, Burkina Faso, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium: Halidou Tinto, Pharm.D., Ph.D., Umberto D’Alessandro, M.D., Ph.D., Hermann Sorgho, Ph.D., Innocent Valea, Pharm.D., Biébo Bihoun, M.D., Issa Guiraud, M.D., Berenger Kaboré, M.D., Olivier Sombié, M.D., Robert Tinga Guiguemdé, M.D., Ph.D., Jean Bosco Ouédraogo, M.D., Ph.D.; KEMRI/CDC Research and Public Health Collaboration, Kisumu, Kenya: Mary J. Hamel, M.D., D.T.M.&H., Simon Kariuki, Ph.D., Martina Oneko, M.D., Chris Odero, Dip.Clin.Med., H.N.D.P.H., Kephas Otieno, H.N.D.M.L.T., Norbert Awino, B.Ed, P.Dip.P.M., Meredith McMorrow, M.D., M.P.H., Vincent Muturi-Kioi, M.B., Ch.B., Kayla F. Laserson, Sc.D., Laurence Slutsker, M.D., M.P.H.; KEMRI–Walter Reed Project, Kombewa, Kenya: Walter Otieno, M.D., M.Med., Ph.D., Lucas Otieno, M.D., M.P.H., Nekoye Otsyula, M.B., Ch.B., Stacey Gondi, M.C.H.D., Allan Otieno, M.B., Ch.B., M.Med., Victorine Owira, B.A., Esther Oguk, Dip.Clin.Med., George Odongo, B.Sc., Jon Ben Woods, M.D., Bernhards Ogutu, M.D., Ph.D.; KEMRI–Wellcome Trust Research Program, Kilifi, Kenya: Patricia Njuguna, M.B., Ch.B., Roma Chilengi, M.D., M.P.H., Pauline Akoo, M.B., Ch.B., Christine Kerubo, M.B., Ch.B., Charity Maingi, R.N., M.P.H., et al.
Page 18 N Engl J Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 06.

Trudie Lang, Ph.D., Ally Olotu, M.B., Ch.B., Philip Bejon, M.B., B.S., D.T.M.&H., Ph.D., Kevin Marsh, M.D., M.R.C.P., D.T.M.&H., Gabriel Mwambingu, H.N.D.M.L.T.; Kintampo Health Research Center, Kintampo, Ghana, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London: Seth Owusu-Agyei, Ph.D., Kwaku Poku Asante, M.D., M.P.H., Kingsley Osei-Kwakye, M.D., M.P.H., Owusu Boahen, M.P.H., David Dosoo, M.Sc., Isaac Asante, M.B.A., George Adjei, M.Sc., Evans Kwara, M.D., Daniel Chandramohan, M.D., Ph.D., Brian Greenwood, M.D.; National Institute for Medical Research, Korogwe, Tanzania, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, and London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London: John Lusingu, M.D., Ph.D., Samwel Gesase, M.D., Anangisye Malabeja, M.D., Omari Abdul, M.D., Coline Mahende, M.Sc., Edwin Liheluka, M.P.H., Lincoln Malle, Dip.M.L.T., Martha Lemnge, Ph.D., Thor G. Theander, M.D., D.Sc., Chris Drakeley, Ph.D.; School of Medical Sciences, Kumasi, Ghana: Daniel Ansong, M.B., F.W.A.C.P., Ch.B., Tsiri Agbenyega, M.B., Ch.B., Ph.D., Samuel Adjei, M.B., Ch.B., P.G.Dip., Harry Owusu Boateng, M.B., Ch.B., M.P.H., M.W.A.C.P., Theresa Rettig, M.D., John Bawa, M.B.A., Justice Sylverken, M.B., Ch.B., Grad.Dip., M.W.A.C.P., David Sambian, Dip.Lab.Tech., Anima Sarfo, M.B., Ch.B., Alex Agyekum, M.Phil.; University of North Carolina Project, Lilongwe, Malawi: Francis Martinson, M.B., Ch.B., M.P.H., Ph.D., Irving Hoffman, M.P.H., Tisungane Mvalo, M.B., B.S., Portia Kamthunzi, M.B., B.S., M.Trop.Paed., D.T.C.H., Rutendo Nkomo, M.B., Ch.B., Tapiwa Tembo, M.Sc., Gerald Tegha, Dip.Lab.Tech., M.Sc., Mercy Tsidya, Dip.Edu., Jane Kilembe, B.Sc., Chimwemwe Chawinga, Dip.Clin.Med.; GlaxoSmithKline Vaccines, Wavre, Belgium (in alphabetical order): W. Ripley Ballou, M.D., Joe Cohen, Ph.D., Yolanda Guerra, M.D., Erik Jongert, Ph.D., Didier Lapierre, M.D., Amanda Leach, M.R.C.P.C.H., Marc Lievens, M.Sc., Opokua Ofori-Anyinam, Ph.D., Aurélie Olivier, Ph.D., Johan Vekemans, M.D., Ph.D.; and PATH Malaria Vaccine Initiative, Washington, DC (in alphabetical order): Terrell Carter, M.H.S., David Kaslow, M.D., Didier Leboulleux, M.D., Christian Loucq, M.D., Afiya Radford, B.S., Barbara Savarese, R.N., David Schellenberg, M.D., Marla Sillman, M.S., Preeti Vansadia, M.H.S.
