Drug resistance in Plasmodium Kasturi Haldar1,2, Souvik Bhattacharjee3, and Innocent Safeukui1,2 1Boler-Parseghian Center for Rare and Neglected Diseases, University of Notre Dame, 103 Galvin Life Sciences, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA.
2Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, 103 Galvin Life Sciences, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA.
3Special Centre for Molecular Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 110067, India.
Abstract A marked decrease in malaria-related deaths worldwide has been attributed to the administration of effective antimalarials against Plasmodium falciparum, in particular, artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs). Increasingly, ACTs are also used to treat Plasmodium vivax, the second major human malaria parasite. However, resistance to frontline artemisinins and partner drugs is now causing the failure of P. falciparum ACTs in southeast Asia. In this Review, we discuss our current knowledge of markers and mechanisms of resistance to artemisinins and ACTs.
In particular, we describe the identification of mutations in the propeller domains of Kelch 13 as the primary marker for artemisinin resistance in P. falciparum and explore two major mechanisms of resistance that have been independently proposed: the activation of the unfolded protein response and proteostatic dysregulation of parasite phosphatidylinositol 3- kinase. We emphasize the continuing challenges and the imminent need to understand mechanisms of resistance to improve parasite detection strategies, develop new combinations to eliminate resistant parasites and prevent their global spread.
Although malaria has taken a staggering toll on human health in the past, the 21st century seems poised to consider its elimination and eradication. Plasmodium falciparum causes the most virulent malaria infections in humans and is responsible for most of the malariarelated deaths. From 2010 to 2015, through the control of the mosquito vector and fastCorrespondence to K.H. khaldar@nd.edu.
Author contributions K.H., S.B. and I.S. researched data for the article, made substantial contributions to discussions of the content, wrote the article and reviewed and edited the manuscript before submission.
Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Reviewer information Nature Reviews Microbiology thanks Didier Menard, and the other anonymous reviewer(s), for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
DATABASES RSCB Protein Data Bank: http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article: S1 (table) HHS Public Access Author manuscript Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.
Published in final edited form as: Nat Rev Microbiol. 2018 March ; 16(3): 156–170. doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2017.161.

acting artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs), the numbers of new cases of P.
falciparum malaria and of malaria-related deaths in the world decreased by ~20% and ~30%, respectively1. However, a substantial global burden remains, with over 400,000 deaths and 200 million new cases reported in 2016 (REF. 2). In addition, Plasmodium vivax, which can infect humans and causes relapsing malaria, is geographically widespread3.
An infection with P. falciparum begins when sporozoites are injected into the bloodstream of the vertebrate host through a mosquito bite and invade hepatocytes (the liver stage). In liver cells, sporozoites form merozoites, which are then released into the bloodstream and infect erythrocytes (the blood stage) (FIG. 1a). The parasites develop into the ring form and subsequently develop into proliferative (and morphologically distinct) trophozoite and schizont stages. At the end of the 48 h asexual life cycle, the schizonts rupture and release daughter merozoites into the plasma to initiate infection of new erythrocytes. Merozoite release coincides with periodic fever every 2 days, which is associated with P. falciparum malaria. In addition to the symptoms of acute infection, blood-stage parasites are also responsible for the severe and often fatal disease pathologies of malaria caused by parasite adhesion to the host endothelium, as the parasites are sequestered and concentrated in tissues, which leads to organ dysfunction4,5. Thus, all antimalarials that are currently used target the proliferative trophozoites and schizonts. Artemisinins also block the ring stage and the sexual parasite stages that lead to transmission from the blood to the mosquito6 when the vector takes a blood meal (FIG. 1a).
Before the use of ACTs, chloroquine and subsequently sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine were effective, inexpensive, safe and widely used to treat acute infections with P. falciparum7,8.
Mefloquine, quinine and lumefantrine are commonly used antimalarials in endemic regions; however, mefloquine has substantially greater side effects than chloroquine and sulfadoxinepyrimethamine9. Clinical failure and spread of resistance to chloroquine and sulfadoxinepyrimethamine10–15 led to the introduction of ACTs in Africa. In ACTs, artemisinins confer rapid and potent effectiveness, while their high rates of clearance from plasma (half-life <1 h (REF. 16)) are offset by a second, longer-lived antimalarial (such as lumefantrine, mefloquine, piperaquine (PPQ), amodiaquine or sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine) as a partner drug (Supplementary information S1 (table)). The underlying rationale is that artemisinins rapidly eliminate the majority of the parasites within days by mechanisms that are distinct from those of the partner drug, which eliminates residual parasites over weeks, raising expectations that parasites that emerge resistant to the artemisinin drug would still be eliminated by the partner drug.
Resistance has emerged to all known antimalarials (FIG. 1b; TABLE 1), and therefore, tracking drug sensitivities of clinical infections is critical to inform treatment strategy as well as strategies of mass drug administration that aim to eliminate malaria. The detection of drug-resistant parasites and their spread was greatly facilitated by the discovery of molecular resistance markers17–21. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of parasites obtained directly from infected individuals can be powerful in identifying chromosomal regions and their associated genes under high selective pressure20,22,23. However, to establish a causal marker requires the ability to reproduce the proliferation of resistant pathogens in the laboratory and in genetic studies. This was readily achieved using standard assays for Haldar et al.
Page 2 Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.

parasites that are resistant to all antimalarials24, except for artemisinins, for which establishing resistance in the laboratory took almost 5 years from their first identification in the field (BOX 1).
Although the identification of genetic resistance markers advances detection, understanding the mechanisms of resistance enables the development of rational strategies for containment and treatment to eliminate malaria. Amplification of and/or SNPs in target catalytic enzymes or efflux pumps are known to confer resistance to many antimalarials25–28. The inhibitory activity of artemisinins depends on the cleavage of their endoperoxide bridge, which yields free radicals, suggesting that these drugs alkylate key target proteins to kill parasites.
However, recent proteomic studies reveal that there are probably hundreds of targets, and thus, killing may be due to more generalized degeneration of the protein milieu (proteopathy)20,30. The gene encoding P. falciparum Kelch 13 (PfKelch13), which is located on chromosome 13, was shown to be the major causative artemisinin-resistance marker18,31,32. PfKelch13 is predicted to be a regulator of protein quality control. It belongs to a eukaryotic evolutionary gene family of ~60 members33. Mammalian orthologues of PfKelch13 confer resistance to cancer drugs that kill tumours by inducing proteopathy34.
This supports the idea that PfKelch13-mediated atemisinin resistance may also have a role in restoring complex systems of protein functions (so-called proteostasis) in the parasite to promote its survival from artemisinin-induced proteopathy. Mechanistically, this is distinct from amplification or mutation of a single target enzyme or pump causing resistance.
Two major mechanisms of artemisinin resistance that have been independently proposed are the activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR)35 and proteostatic dysregulation of P.
falciparum phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PfPI3K), which leads to increased levels of the lipid product phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate (PtdIns3P)36. Whether those mechanisms function in one or parallel effector pathways of resistance remains unknown. Simultaneous resistance to partner drugs has accelerated clinical failure of ACTs37,38, emphasizing the need to better manage existing ACTs and other antimalarials as well as to develop potent new drug combinations through a discovery pipeline informed by mechanisms of resistance to ACTs. Recent studies also suggested that host immunity contributes to resistance39, which seems to be a unique characteristic of artemisinin resistance that may affect the elimination of malaria.
In this Review, we integrate key lessons learned from clinical, genetic and molecular analyses of P. falciparum and P. vivax drug treatment failure over the past 5 years, with a particular focus on artemisinin resistance. We discuss resistance markers and drug targets that have been identified, focusing on the two major effector pathways of artemisinin resistance: the UPR and PfPI3K. We emphasize how understanding mechanisms of drug resistance is critical in eliminating the parasites, which places high demands on detection, risk assessment, therapy and drug development to treat both symptomatic and asymptomatic infections with heterogeneous parasite burdens in high-transmission and low-transmission areas, all of which are dynamic frontiers on the path to the end game of malaria elimination.
Haldar et al.
Page 3 Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.

Antimalarial drugs and resistance Drug targets and resistance markers.
To date, not all molecular targets of known antimalarials that are currently in use are defined. Drug resistance can be mediated by a direct catalytic mechanism, or it can be due to amplification of the gene encoding the target enzyme or transporter that pumps the drug out of the parasite. Additionally, resistance can be mediated by processes that mitigate toxicity induced by the drug.
Sulfadoxine and pyrimethamine inhibit the P. falciparum enzymes dihydropteroate synthase (PfDhps) and dihydrofolate reductase (PfDhfr), respectively, which function in the folate pathway. Resistance to these antimalarials is conferred by dominant mutations in catalytic sites and/or amplification of the pfdhps and pfdhfr genes15,40–42. Multiple mutations in pfdhps and pfdhfr confer resistance to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine in endemic regions, and parasites with quintuple mutations (pfdhfrN51I,C59R,S108N and pfdhpsA437G,K540E) have been linked to sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine resistance in Africa43. Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine has been partnered with the artemisinin-based compound artesunate (Supplementary information S1 (table)). Double, triple and quadruple mutations in pfdhfr and pfdhps genes led to replacement of this drug combination with a second ACT composed of the artemisinin-based compound artemether and the partner drug lumefantrine in North East India44.
Atovaquone (of the naphthoquinone drug class) is partnered with proguanil in the drug Malarone (GlaxoSmithKline). Owing to its high cost as well as the emergence of resistance to atovaquone, Malarone is mainly used by travellers rather than resident populations of endemic countries. P. falciparum cytochrome b (PfCytB), which is a mitochondrial electron donor, is the target of atovaquone. Mutations in pfcytb that lead to changes in its catalytic activity render resistance to atovaquone28. In combination, atovaquone and proguanil (in its inactive prodrug form) dissipate mitochondrial membrane potential45. This synergistic action is lost in parasites with mutated pfcytb46; in particular, clinical failure of atovaquone is associated with pfcytbY268S/C/N. Notably, parasites with mutations in pfcytb (albeit not Y268S/C/N) show reduced transmission to mosquitoes. This has led to the suggestion that although atovaquone resistance may arise, it will not easily spread, and thus, atovaquoneproguanil may be useful for prophylaxis in elimination strategies (where it is important to block transmission to vectors)47.
Chloroquine targets the polymerization of free haem within the food vacuole of the parasite.
In the food vacuole, haemoglobin that has been taken up from the host is digested into amino acids, which are used for parasite protein synthesis, and into Fe2+- containing haem48. Fe2+-containing haem is oxidized to Fe3+-containing protoporphyrin IX (FPIX), which is toxic to the parasite and therefore is converted to the polymer haemozoin (the black pigment of malaria). Chloroquine disrupts haemozoin formation. The major chloroquineresistance mechanism is drug efflux via the P. falciparum chloroquine-resistance transporter (encoded by pfcrt) located at the food vacuole. An SNP, K76T, in pfcrt was universally associated with chloroquine resistance in Africa17 (TABLE 1), and globally, K76T and other additional mutations in pfcrt are associated with the development of chloroquine resistance26,49–52.
Haldar et al.
Page 4 Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.

Mutations and amplification in broad, xenobiotic efflux pumps (such as P. falciparum multidrug resistance protein (pfmdrl), which encodes a protein that is also located in the membrane of the food vacuole) confer measurable levels of resistance to many antimalarials (TABLE 1). Mutations in and/or amplification of pfmdr1 confer resistance to partner drugs such as mefloquine and lumefantrine and thus limit effective treatment with ACTs53. Indeed, widespread amplification of pfmdr1 in southeast Asia led to replacement of artesunate and mefloquine by dihydroartemisinin (DHA; the active metabolite of all artemisinins) and PPQ.
Although PPQ is structurally related to chloroquine, it is effective against parasites that harbour some resistance mutations in pfcrt and is therefore of value even in the presence of chloroquine resistance52,54. Notably, the introduction of the pfcrtC101F mutation into chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum parasites reduced chloroquine transport and thus rendered them chloroquine sensitive but PPQ resistant55. Together, these studies provide molecular evidence that different alleles of pfcrt differently affect resistance to chloroquine and PPQ.
Artemether-lumefantrine and artesunate- amodiaquine also interact with pfcrt and pfmdr1, but each ACT selects different resistance alleles in these genes56, suggesting that artesunateamodiaquine is effective in treating parasites resistant to a partner drug such as lumefantrine.
Parasite genetic profiles responsive to PPQ selection suggest that ACTs containing PPQ are also effective against resistance to lumefantrine (reviewed in REFS 56,57).
Risk factors for artemisinin resistance.
From 2008 to 2013, many parasite determinants were shown to be risk factors for artemisinin resistance, largely through population-transcriptomic and population-genetic studies22,58–60. These population-based tools were combined with extended laboratory drug selections (carried out over 5 years) to reveal mutations in the β-propeller domains of PfKelch13 (PfKelch13-propeller mutations) as the primary marker for artemisinin resistance in P. falciparum malaria18. Identification of PfKelch13 galvanized mapping the spread of resistance to these frontline antimalarials worldwide19,21,61 (FIG. 1b).
PfKelch13 is neither a transporter nor an enzyme. Rather, its structure reveals an aminoterminal BTB domain (common to all Broad-complex, Tramtrack and Bric-a-brac domain (BTB) family proteins; also known as the poxvirus and zinc-finger (POZ) domain) with six Kelch domains (from which it derives its name) (FIG. 2). The BTB domain promotes dimerization, while Kelch domains enable binding to specific substrates to accelerate their ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation. Mutations in Kelch domains decrease substrate binding, ubiquitylation and targeting to proteasomes: the net effect is increased levels of substrate accumulation (and relocalization), which are frequently associated with mammalian genetic disorders33. Resistance mutations in pfkelch13 (FIG. 2a,b) have been detected throughout southeast Asia and Myanmar21 and have emerged by parasite spread and independently20,23. Notably, the major mutations in Myanmar differ from those in Cambodia21,62,63. Low-abundance Cambodian polymorphisms in pfkelch13 have been reported in India64,65 but were not associated with treatment failure. Nonetheless, the predicted path of artemisinin resistance from southeast Asia to Myanmar, through Haldar et al.
Page 5 Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.

Bangladesh and India, seems to be similar to that by which chloroquine resistance became pervasive in Africa66,67.
By 2010, in all countries where malaria was endemic, ACTs were the recommended firstline therapy for uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria68 (Supplementary information S1 (table)). Unfortunately, partial resistance to artemisinins had emerged even earlier (as early as 2008)69,70, likely owing to historic use of artemisinin monotherapy in southeast Asia.
ACTs substantially reduced parasite burdens in Africa71,72, but considerable levels of malaria remain. If extensive resistance to ACTs developed in Africa, it would have potential for seeding epidemics there. By contrast, malaria burdens are relatively low in Asia (and sometimes are reliably detected only by ultrasensitive PCR), but a large fraction of these parasites in asymptomatic individuals is resistant to artemisinins73. As transmission of these parasites could spread resistance, mass drug administration was recently undertaken with the ACT DHA-PPQ37,38. This combination was effective in clearing parasites from a majority of asymptomatic individuals, but it did not result in complete elimination and yielded parasite strains dually resistant to both DHA and PPQ, thereby providing a compelling rationale for developing a triple artemisinin combination therapy74.
Parasites from southeast Asia that are resistant to both DHA and PPQ show simultaneous polymorphisms in pfkelch13 and amplification of parasite proteases plasmepsin 2 and plasmepsin 3 (REFS 37,38). In the presence of resistance to the artemisinin-based drug alone, the partner drug functions as a monotherapy, which results in the rapid emergence of resistance to the partner as well, thereby generating dually resistant parasites. Moreover, ‘fit’ Cambodian PfKelch13-C580Y mutations of artemisinin resistance that spread rapidly may accelerate resistance to partner drugs such as PPQ75. Plasmepsin 2 and plasmepsin 3 are involved in haemoglobin digestion (in the food vacuole), and the acceleration of this process in resistant parasites may increase the release of free amino acids to the nutrient pool of the parasite. This may stimulate new protein synthesis to overcome inhibition of haemoglobin catabolism and haem detoxification by PPQ and support proteostasis mediated by PfKelch13-based artemisinin resistance. The link between PPQ resistance and amplification of plasmepsins suggests that PPQ targets early steps of haemoglobin digestion (in addition to terminal steps of haem polymerization). Consequently, resistance to drugs that target intermediate determinants of the haemoglobin degradation pathway may also contribute to multidrug resistance. As pfmdrl and pfcrt affect the activity of partner drugs53,76 (BOX 1), both determinants have an important role in multidrug resistance and ACT resistance (possibly even in ring stages that are now reported to degrade haemoglobin to release Fe2+- containing haem for endoperoxide cleavage and artemisinin action77, even though they lack a prominent food vacuole in which haemoglobin is degraded in later trophozoite and schizont stages). The prevalence of background mutations to partner drugs also renders ACT a monotherapy, thereby increasing the likelihood of the emergence of resistance to artemisinins. In sum, mechanisms of resistance to different individual drugs in an ACT may iteratively modulate multidrug resistance to emerging combination therapies.
A recent study reports on clinical artemisinin resistance (as detected by increased parasite clearance times in patients administered with drugs) in the absence of mutation in pfkelch13 (REF. 78). Studies on longitudinal genomic surveillance of artemisinin resistance suggest Haldar et al.
Page 6 Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.

that after PfKelch13-C580Y, the strongest temporal changes are seen at SNPs in phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase and Sec14-like cytosolic factor or phosphatidylinositolphosphatidylcholine transfer protein (a phosphatidylinositol-phosphatidylcholine exchange protein)79. Laboratory findings provide independent evidence that PtdIns3P alone is sufficient to confer resistance in the absence of pfkelch13 mutation36. Together, these studies suggest that polymorphisms and/or amplification of genes in the phosphoinositide pathways of the parasite are particularly insightful in tracking both PfKelch13-dependent and PfKelch13-independent resistance.
P. vivax infection is limited to reticulocytes, which are precursors to erythrocytes and present in very low numbers in blood. Therefore, P. vivax parasitaemia is not as high as that of P.
falciparum, but this species causes substantial disease, including severe malaria80. There is widespread and increasing resistance of P. vivax to chloroquine and sulfadoxinepyrimethamine (TABLE 1; Supplementary information S1 (table))81–84. ACTs are now used to treat malaria caused by P vivax (Supplementary information S1 (table))85. An orthologue of PfKelch13 exists in P. vivax (PvKelch13), but there are no reports yet of P. vivax resistance to artemisinins. The major limitation for the treatment of P vivax infections with ACTs is that latent liver-stage parasites are not targeted, and, therefore, relapse is not blocked. Latent infection with P. vivax in the liver can be targeted only by primaquine, the use of which is recommended in combination with blood-stage antimalarials (Supplementary information S1 (table)).
Challenges in identifying artemisinin-resistance markers.
The identification of PfKelch13 as a resistance marker presented unique challenges (BOX 1). To begin with, when clinical isolates with delayed in vivo clearance (characteristic of artemisinin resistance) were adapted to culture, the parasites failed to show concomitant drug-resistant survival in conventional in vitro half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) assays. The ring-stage survival assay (RSA) (BOX 1) presented an important advance in the development of an in vitro correlate of clinical resistance that mimics the short exposure of ring parasites to the high plasma concentration of artemisinins (700 nM) seen in patients86.
In addition, it took several years to select parasites in the laboratory that survived concentrations of DHA that were 1,000-fold higher than the IC50 of this drug. Both were needed to reveal mutation in pfkelch13 as a critical resistance event18. Exquisitely precise genome editing technologies31,32 provided genetic evidence that major polymorphisms in pfkelch13 that were associated with resistant clinical strains were indeed causal for artemisinin resistance as detected by the RSA across parasite genetic strains (BOX 2).
Population studies established PfKelch13-C580Y as the major mutation (accounting for 80% of resistant cases) responsible for clinical artemisinin resistance in southeast Asia19. This mutation can result in high levels of resistance, although this varies depending on the genetic background of the parasite31,32. One explanation for this observed strain-specific variation in resistance is that although PfKelch13 is linked to resistance, additional genes (whose expression varies in different genetic strains) modify PfKelch13 function in artemisinin resistance. The mutation F446I found in parasites in Myanmar is associated with moderate clinical resistance62,63.
Haldar et al.
Page 7 Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.

Challenges remain in current assays for artemisinin and ACT resistance. For example, survival as expressed by the RSA describes only two parasite categories: those with an RSA value <1 (which are sensitive) and those with an RSA value >1 (which are resistant).
Importantly, we do not understand why in a parasite population that is genetically homogenous in the resistance mutation C580Y (induced by an SNP in the genome of a sensitive strain), only a fraction of parasites survive drug exposure in the RSA (for example, 12–14% survival in the engineered strain PfNF54 with PfKelch13-C580Y compared with <1% survival in the wild-type PfNF54 strain). In other words, how do PfKelch13 mutants become heterogeneous in their phenotypic survival response to DHA even when they are genetically identical? There is urgent need to understand the mechanism and whether it accelerates acquisition of simultaneous resistance to a second partner drug.
Molecular mechanisms of artemisinin resistance Plasmodium falciparum Kelch 13 structure and function.
The best studied mammalian orthologue of PfKelch13 is Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (KEAP1), which functions by binding and ubiquitylating nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NFE2L2), a nuclear transcription factor, to control its protein levels87. Mutation of KEAP1 results in increased protein levels of NFE2L2 and its translocation to the nucleus.
Therefore, in prior reviews of artemisinin resistance, emphasis had been given to the idea that PfKelch13 may also regulate an analogous transcriptional factor in the parasite88,89.
However, in eukaryotes, the Kelch family comprises over 60 proteins with diverse substrates33. PfKelch13 belongs to the KBTBD subfamily, members of which contain a BTB domain (see above) that functions as an adaptor between E3 ubiquitin ligases and Kelch domains (FIG. 2c) to form active ubiquitylation complexes that regulate turnover of a wide range of substrates with distinct cellular functions and location90–92.
The structure of PfKelch13 does suggest a redox function owing to the presence of seven cysteine residues in the β-propeller domain (FIG. 2a,b) (the corresponding KEAP1 region contains eight cysteines). When cellular thiol levels become depleted and oxidative stress increases, cysteine residues in a redox sensor protein, or residues close to them, mutate and render a conformational change to compensate for the oxidative damage. When this occurs in a β-propeller domain, its target substrate is released, accumulates and may also change location to trigger a global antioxidative response (like a transcriptional signal to increase cellular thiol levels). In PfKelch13, mutations in the β-propeller domain are predicted to induce a conformational change and decrease the affinity of PfKelch13 for its target protein, which can potentially change both the levels and location of the target protein or target proteins. The C580Y mutation (the major artemisinin-resistance mutation in southeast Asia) shows reduced binding to and ubiquity- lation of PfPI3K, increasing the levels of the kinase itself and of its lipid product PtdIns3P36. The effects of other PfKelch13 mutations on PfPI3K binding are not known, but R539T also increases PtdIns3P36. In addition, R539T and another prevalent Cambodian mutation, I543T, and major Myanmar mutations F446I and M476I (a highly resistant laboratory mutation) are located within 1–3 amino acids of a cysteine residue, whereas lesser to minor mutations Y493T, R561H and P574L or polymorphisms not associated with resistance (A578S) are located in distal loop regions Haldar et al.
Page 8 Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.

(FIG. 2a,b). It is possible that the extent of redox sensing by PfKelch13 may have a role in the level and/or prevalence of mutations in southeast Asia (and other areas globally).
Mutations in the Kelch domain are expected to increase substrate levels: thus, redox sensing by PfKelch13 is also expected to increase substrate levels and their associated mechanisms of resistance (FIG. 2c).
Major effector pathways of artemisinin resistance: the unfolded protein response and Plasmodium falciparum phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase.
The activity of artemisinin against a parasite is dependent on cleavage of the endoperoxide bridge in the drug, and recent studies suggest that the resulting free radicals do not have a specific target but rather insert indiscriminately into proteins throughout the parasite. Thus, the killing mechanisms may be due to proteopathy (see above). Recovery from proteopathy requires multiple cellular functions that include removal of misfolded, aggregated toxic proteins and their replacement through new protein translation, translocation, folding and vesicular export, which together contribute to proteostasis.
Two major mechanisms of artemisinin resistance in P. falciparum have been proposed35,36.
Population-based transcriptomic studies35 examined resistant clinical isolates of ring-stage parasites and provided evidence for the transcriptional increase of two major chaperone complexes, the reactive oxidative stress complex (ROSC) linked to the UPR and the Tcomplex protein 1 (TCP1) ring complex (TRiC). The studies suggested that the increased expression of those chaperone complexes mitigates toxic protein aggregates in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and cytoplasm by accelerating their removal through the proteasome (via the ROSC) or by restoring proper folding (via the TRiC). Other studies examined ubiquitylation-enhanced parasite stress and altered patterns of development in resistant para- sites93. A link between ubiquitylation and the UPR was not described, but proteasomal inhibitors were found to synergize with artemisinins in parasite killing93, a property that is also shared by selective inhibitors of the plasmodial proteasome in both drug-sensitive and drug-resistant parasites94. Proteasomal inhibitors also seem to synergize with other antimalarial compounds95. The function of the UPR (principally through the ROSC) is to re-establish ER homeostasis by overcoming imbalanced protein-folding capacity and more importantly by triggering a transcriptional response to stimulate gene expression and restore redox conditions throughout the cell. The UPR is one of multiple proteostasis mechanisms used to maintain quality control of protein folding in eukaryotes.
We discuss four major relevant pathways and their potential pertinence for mechanisms of artemisinin resistance in P. falciparum malaria (FIG. 3).
The ER-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway is a steady-state mechanism by which misfolded proteins in the ER are unfolded, translocated back to the cytoplasm and ubiquitylated for subsequent degradation by the proteasome (FIG. 3). For our model, proteasomal degradation is limited to the 26S proteasome, as PfKelch13 mediates ubiquitylation (the 20S proteasome involved in ubiquitin-independent degradation is not considered here). When the ERAD pathway gets saturated, immunoglobulin heavy chainbinding protein (BiP; also known as HSPA5), which is the major ER chaperone and a key component of the ROSC, binds to luminal misfolded proteins, resulting in its disassociation Haldar et al.
Page 9 Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.

from and activation of ER transmembrane sensors (to which BiP is usually bound). P.
falciparum encodes the ER transmembrane sensor protein-kinase R (PKR)- like ER kinase (PERK; also known as eIF2AK3), which phosphorylates elongation initiation factor 2A (eIF2A), suggesting a mechanism of translational repression as an adaptive response to misfolded proteins that transiently delays maturation of mutant parasites96 (and also explains the morphologies of apparent arrest)97. Of note, P. falciparum lacks orthologues of ER transmembrane stress-response receptors such as activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) and inositol-requiring protein 1 (IRE1) as well as ATF4, and thus, the transcriptional pathways leading to the increased expression of UPR components remain unknown. Initial analyses of PfKelch13 mutants provided evidence that BiP protein levels are not increased during even the peak of the ring stages of artemisinin-resistant parasites (that is, after 0–3 h)36. It is therefore possible that the pfkelch13 mutation alone is insufficient to induce the global transcriptional effect of the UPR. In clinical isolates of drug-resistant P. falciparum, there is an increase in transcription of BiP, TRiC proteins and ROSC components (other than BiP). This may also be a response to drug-induced formation of toxic protein aggregates.
Parasite BiP has been reported as a high confidence protein, alkylated and aggregated after exposure to artemisinins29, which confirms that it can be a drug target. However, in the absence of transcription factor orthologues of ATF6, IRE1 or ATF4, the UPR alone seems limited to the parasite ER and to a cytoplasmic chaperone mechanism (through the TRiC), rather than global transcriptional reprogramming to activate redox-protective functions, and thus may be insufficient to rescue widespread artemisinin-induced proteopathy (as well as nucleic acid and lipid damage).
A second mechanism of resistance independently emerged from studies of PfPI3K, a parasite lipid kinase expressed during the blood stages36. Phylogenetic analyses revealed that PfPI3K is an orthologue of yeast phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase Vps34, which is a class III kinase with a single lipid product, PtdIns3P, that localizes in cytoplasmic orientation in the cell98,99. PfPI3K was found to be potently inhibited by DHA, which suggested that the kinase is a substrate for PfKelch13. Indeed, PfPI3K was shown to be isolated in a complex with PfKelch13, ubiquitylated and targeted for proteasomal degradation36. Moreover, evidence suggested that PfKelch13 resistance mutations abrogate binding to and ubiquitylation of PfPI3K and lead to increased levels of the kinase and its lipid product PtdIns3P (FIGS 2c,3). Evidence was also presented that overexpression of PtdIns3P induced resistance independent of mutation of PfKelch13. In yeast (which, like P. falciparum, contains only a single PI3K), Vps34 regulates autophagy (FIG. 3), which can remove misfolded proteins in the cytoplasm. Similarly, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 3- kinase (PIK3), a mammalian orthologue of Vps34, is central to PtdIns3P-dependent expansion of the autophagosome, which leads to macroautophagy100. However, little is known about macroautophagy in P. falciparum. In P. falciparum, PtdIns3P has been detected at the apicoplast, food vacuole and ER101–103. Most of these studies used fluorescent reporter systems, and it will be important to localize endogenous PtdIns3P in the parasite.
Malaria parasites contain a subset of autophagy- related genes (ATG), including autophagyassociated protein Atg8 (atg8), which is required for the formation of autophagosomal membranes and has been shown to be expressed in blood-stage parasites104,105. Atg8 has been localized to the apicoplast as well as to other vesicles in the parasite, but Haldar et al.
Page 10 Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.

macroautophagy was not yet shown to occur at the apicoplast. Macroautophagy could in principle represent a vesicle-dependent mechanism to remove toxic aggregates and misfolded proteins that have been damaged by artemisinins at any cellular location. As membrane vesicles are derived from the ER, they may also be coupled to increased translation and other proteostasis mechanisms (including nuclear processes) to restore cellular homeostasis and parasite survival and, in principle, to confer resistance to any drug that functions by alkylation of cellular targets.
Whether the increases in the levels of PtdIns3P (through proteostatic control of PfPI3K; see below) and the ROSC indicate common and/or related mechanisms of resistance has sparked discussion88,89. Mutations in pfkelch13 are expected to lead to increased levels of cytoplasmic protein substrates such as PfPI3K. Mutations in pfkelch13 may also increase levels of cytoplasmic chaperones such as those in the TRiC and in the ROSC in the ER lumen (but the mechanisms of increase remain unknown). Notably, protein misfolding is thermodynamically variable, and the degree of protein folding (and the functional activity of the protein) varies; therefore, the amplitude of resistance may vary among individual parasites (FIG. 4). Mutants with a higher amplitude of resistance may be better equipped to remove misfolded or aggregated proteins induced by artemisinins and survive (FIG. 4), possibly explaining why isogenic pfkelch13 mutations show heterogeneity in survival in the RSA (BOX 1). Further, in addition to PfKelch13, a wide range of mechanisms of parasite protein quality control may potentially confer artemisinin resistance (FIG. 3).
Therapy and risk assessment The identification of resistance markers and mechanisms of resistance guides treatment strategies. Of the ACTs available, PPQ in combination with artemisinin derivatives is expected to be recommended as the first- line treatment or as preventive treatment for infants or pregnant women in Africa. The combined analyses of pfkelch13 polymorphisms and plasmepsin 2 copy number (along with pfmdr1 amplification) provide a molecular prediction kit to enable continued treatment with ACT that is based on risk analyses in the population.
A gold standard of artemisinin resistance is delayed clearance of parasites as directly measured in a patient in the clinic, and thus, this metric of drug resistance is expected to be influenced by the host immune response39. Higher levels of immunity are expected to accelerate parasite clearance and mask resistance. Haemoglobinopathies, which alter the redox properties of host erythrocytes, may also influence the effectiveness of artemisinins owing to the increased levels of oxidative stress in infected blood cells106,107. This suggests that both the moderately high parasite burdens still seen in regions of Africa, which elicit a protective immune response, and the health status of the host modulate the spread of artemisinin resistance. Because of this, it will be important to monitor clinical polymorphisms that emerge using RSAs (and other laboratory assays that do not take host innate and adaptive immunity into account). This will flag the risk of potential clinical resistance that may emerge as both parasite burden and corresponding immunity wane. In southeast Asia, mefloquine will be added to DHA-PPQ and amodiaquine will be added to artemether-lumefantrine to generate triple ACTs as an elimination strategy74. This needs careful monitoring because mefloquine can affect heart rhythms and has neurological side effects. Mass drug administration in southeast Asia is further challenged by the emergence Haldar et al.
Page 11 Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.

of PfKelch13-independent artemisinin resistance that may also occur together with resistance to a second drug (such as PPQ) and that is not invariably linked to amplification and/or mutation of the multidrug resistance transporter PfMdrl (REF. 78).
Outlook The antimalarial discovery pipeline (reviewed in REF. 108) aims to develop next-generation single-dose therapies that contain both fast-acting (to replace artemisinins) and long-acting (to replace partners) drugs. Of the fast-acting synthetic endoperoxides, OZ277 (which has moved to registration) shows cross-resistance to the pfkelch13 mutations C580Y, R539T and I543T, which are associated with artemisinins, whereas other compounds show crossresistance with less prevalent pfkelch13 mutations (R539T and I543T)109,110. This suggests that mechanisms of resistance to synthetic endoperoxides and artemisinin are similar but that some endoperoxides in the antimalarial pipeline slow the spread of the maj or artemisininresistance mutation, PfKelch13-C580Y. Lead compounds that are not as fast-acting111,112 may be suitable for triple combinations with the caveat that they may be less effective if they are effluxed out of parasites owing to amplification of pfmdrl, which is often found in multidrug-resistant parasites53. As increased levels of PtdIns3P have been shown to induce resistance, PFPI3K presents a potentially important target, but new inhibitor series have not yet been described. Mechanistic studies suggest that resistance to artemisinins can affect many cellular targets. Therefore, it will be important to develop new drugs with known targets to strengthen discovery strategies for compounds that are fast-acting and long-acting against blood-stage parasites113 as well as to develop drugs that target transmission to the mosquito vector114.
As elimination strategies are focused in local or regional efforts, the distribution of malaria has become highly heterogeneous worldwide. It will be important to comprehensively sample parasite populations. Measurement of clinical parasite clearance demands infrastructure for appropriate patient monitoring, which may be impossible to achieve in severely resource-restricted areas (which is also where malaria burdens remain the highest).
The RSA requires adapting clinical samples to culture, which is difficult to achieve at the low parasitaemia seen in southeast Asia. PfKelch13-independent mechanisms cannot yet be detected by genome sequencing. This argues for future validation through functional assays that capture the entire resistance pathway and that can be executed without culture and with small amounts of blood to reduce the resources needed in high-transmission areas and to justify engagement of asymptomatic populations in low-transmission settings. Eliminating a major microbial pathogen with drugs alone in individuals with very low parasite burdens that do not elicit a substantial protective immune response may also yield hitherto unknown biological paradigms of resistance and detection.
Supplementary Material Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Haldar et al.
Page 12 Nat Rev Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 February 12.

Acknowledgements.
The authors apologize to colleagues whose work could not be cited owing to the broad scope of the Review and space limitation. They thank members of the Haldar laboratory for insightful discussion. Work in the authors’ laboratories was supported by the US National Institutes of Health (R01 HL069630 and HL130330) and India Government Department of Science and Technology (ECR/2015/000387) and Department of Biotechnology Ramalingaswami Re-entry Fellowship (BT/HRD/35/02/2006).
